Practice Project: GDP Data Extraction and Processing

In this practice project, you will put the skills acquired through the course to use. You will extract data from a website using webscraping and request APIs process it using Pandas and Numpy libraries.

To complete this lab, you will utilize JupyterLab running on the Cloud in the Skills Network Labs environment. 

Skills Network Labs (SN Labs) is a virtual lab environment used in this course. Upon clicking the "Start Lab" button below, your Username and Email will be passed to SN Labs and will be used in strict accordance with IBM Skills Network Privacy policy, such as for communicating important information to enhance your learning experience.

In case you need to download the lab instructions click HERE to open a new tab.

Project Scenario:¶
An international firm that is looking to expand its business in different countries across the world has recruited you. You have been hired as a junior Data Engineer and are tasked with creating a script that can extract the list of the top 10 largest economies of the world in descending order of their GDPs in Billion USD (rounded to 2 decimal places), as logged by the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

The required data seems to be available on the URL mentioned below:

URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20230902185326/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_GDP_%28nominal%29



Objectives
After completing this lab you will be able to:

Use Webscraping to extract required information from a website.
Use Pandas to load and process the tabular data as a dataframe.
Use Numpy to manipulate the information contatined in the dataframe.
Load the updated dataframe to CSV file.


Setup¶






For this lab, we will be using the following libraries:

pandas for managing the data.
numpy for mathematical operations.


Importing Required Libraries
We recommend you import all required libraries in one place (here):

import numpy as np
import pandas as pd

# You can also use this section to suppress warnings generated by your code:
def warn(*args, **kwargs):
    pass
import warnings
warnings.warn = warn
warnings.filterwarnings('ignore')








Exercises
Exercise 1
Extract the required GDP data from the given URL using Web Scraping.
URL="https://web.archive.org/web/20230902185326/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_GDP_%28nominal%29"

You can use Pandas library to extract the required table directly as a DataFrame. Note that the required table is the third one on the website, as shown in the image below.

# Extract tables from webpage using Pandas. Retain table number 3 as the required dataframe.

# Replace the column headers with column numbers
df.columns = range(df.shape[1])

# Retain columns with index 0 and 2 (name of country and value of GDP quoted by IMF)

# Retain the Rows with index 1 to 10, indicating the top 10 economies of the world.

# Assign column names as "Country" and "GDP (Million USD)"

SOLUTION

# Extract tables from webpage using Pandas. Retain table number 3 as the required dataframe.
tables = pd.read_html(URL)
df = tables[2]

# Replace the column headers with column numbers
df.columns = range(df.shape[1])

# Retain columns with index 0 and 2 (name of country and value of GDP quoted by IMF)
df = df[[0,2]]

# Retain the Rows with index 1 to 10, indicating the top 10 economies of the world.
df = df.iloc[1:11,:]

# Assign column names as "Country" and "GDP (Million USD)"
df.columns = ['Country','GDP (Million USD)']



Exercise 2¶
Modify the GDP column of the DataFrame, converting the value available in Million USD to Billion USD. Use the round() method of Numpy library to round the value to 2 decimal places. Modify the header of the DataFrame to GDP (Billion USD).


# Change the data type of the 'GDP (Million USD)' column to integer. Use astype() method.

# Convert the GDP value in Million USD to Billion USD

# Use numpy.round() method to round the value to 2 decimal places.

# Rename the column header from 'GDP (Million USD)' to 'GDP (Billion USD)'

SOLUTION

# Change the data type of the 'GDP (Million USD)' column to integer. Use astype() method.
df['GDP (Million USD)'] = df['GDP (Million USD)'].astype(int)

# Convert the GDP value in Million USD to Billion USD
df[['GDP (Million USD)']] = df[['GDP (Million USD)']]/1000

# Use numpy.round() method to round the value to 2 decimal places.
df[['GDP (Million USD)']] = np.round(df[['GDP (Million USD)']], 2)

# Rename the column header from 'GDP (Million USD)' to 'GDP (Billion USD)'
df.rename(columns = {'GDP (Million USD)' : 'GDP (Billion USD)'})


Exercise 3






Load the DataFrame to the CSV file named "Largest_economies.csv"

SOLUTION

# Load the DataFrame to the CSV file named "Largest_economies.csv"
df.to_csv('./Largest_economies.csv')
